# network-security-private-communication-in-a-public-world-2nd-ed-14th (2)-pages-3

## Page 1

organizations may have discovered this technology earlier). Unlike secret key cryptography, 
keys are not shared. Instead, each individual has two keys: a private key that need not be 
revealed to anyone, and a public key that is preferably known to the entire world. Note that we 
call the private key a private key and not a secret key. This convention is an attempt to make it 
clear in any context whether public key cryptography or secret key cryptography is being used. 
Some people use the term secret key for the private key in public key cryptography, or use the 
term private key for the secret key in secret key technology. We hope to convince people to use 
the term secret key only as the single secret number used in secret key cryptography. The term 
private key should refer to the key in public key cryptography that must not be made public. 
Unfortunately, both words public and private begin with p. We will sometimes want a single 
letter to refer to one of the keys. The letter p won’t do. We will use the letter e to refer to the 
public key, since the public key is used when encrypting a message. We’ll use the letter d to 
refer to the 2.5 PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 45 private key, because the private key is used to 
decrypt a message. Encryption and decryption are two mathematical functions that are 
inverses of each other. There is an additional thing one can do with public key technology, 
which is to generate a digital signature on a message. A digital signature is a number associated 
with a message, like a checksum or the MAC described in §2.4.5 Integrity Check. However, 
unlike a checksum, which can be generated by anyone, a digital signature can only be 
generated by someone knowing the private key. A public key signature differs from a secret key 
MAC because verification of a MAC requires knowledge of the same secret as was used to 
create it. Therefore anyone who can verify a MAC can also generate one, and so be able to 
substitute a different message and corresponding MAC. In contrast, verification of the signature 
only requires knowledge of the public key. So Alice can sign a message by generating a 
signature only she can generate, and other people can verify that it is Alice’s signature, but 
cannot forge her signature. This is called a signature because it shares with handwritten 
signatures the property that it is possible to recognize a signature as authentic without being 
able to forge it. plaintext ciphertext encryption public key ciphertext plaintext decryption private 
key plaintext signed message signing private key signed message plaintext verification public 
key 46 INTRODUCTION TO CRYPTOGRAPHY 2.5.1 2.5.1 Security Uses of Public Key 
Cryptography Public key cryptography can do anything secret key cryptography can do, but the 
known public key cryptographic algorithms are orders of magnitude slower than the best known 
secret key cryptographic algorithms and so are usually used together with secret key 
algorithms. Public key cryptography is very useful because network security based on public 
key technology tends to be more easily configurable. Public key cryptography might be used in 
the beginning of communication for authentication and to establish a temporary shared secret 
key, then the secret key is used to encrypt the remainder of the conversation using secret key 
technology. For instance, suppose Alice wants to talk to Bob. She uses his public key to encrypt 
a secret key, then uses that secret key to encrypt whatever else she wants to send him. Since 
the secret key is much smaller than the message, using the slow public key cryptography to 
encrypt the secret key is not that much of a performance hit. Only Bob can decrypt the secret 
key. He can then communicate using that secret key with whoever sent that message. Notice 
that given this protocol, Bob does not know that it was Alice who sent the message. This could 
be fixed by having Alice digitally sign the encrypted secret key using her private key. Now we’ll 
describe the types of things one might do with public key cryptography. 2.5.2 Transmitting Over 
an Insecure Channel Suppose Alice’s 〈public key, private key〉 pair is 〈eA, dA〉. Suppose Bob’s 
key pair is 〈eB, dB〉. Assume Alice knows Bob’s public key, and Bob knows Alice’s public key. 
Actually, accurately learning other people’s public keys is one of the biggest challenges in using 
public key cryptography and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 13 PKI (Public Key 


## Page 2

Infrastructure). But for now, don’t worry about it. 2.5.3 Secure Storage on Insecure Media This is 
really the same as what one would do with secret key cryptography. You’d encrypt the data with 
your public key. Then nobody can decrypt it except you, since decryption will require the use of 
the private key. For performance reasons, you probably wouldn’t encrypt the data directly with 
the public key, but rather randomly generate a secret key, encrypt the data with that secret key, 
and encrypt that secret key with the public key. As with secret key technology, if you lose your 
private Alice Bob encrypt mA using eB decrypt to mA using dB decrypt to mB using dA encrypt 
mB using eA 2.5.4 PUBLIC KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 47 key, the data is irretrievably lost. If you are 
worried about that, you can encrypt an additional copy of the data encryption key under the 
public key of someone you trust, like your lawyer. Or you can store copies of your private key 
with someone you trust (see §21.9.1 Key Escrow). Public key technology has an important 
advantage over secret key technology for this application. Alice can encrypt a message for Bob 
without knowing his decryption key. 2.5.4 Authentication With secret key cryptography, if Alice 
and Bob want to communicate, they have to share a secret. If Bob wants to be able to prove his 
identity to lots of entities, then with secret key technology he will need to remember lots of 
secret keys, one for each entity to which he would like to prove his identity. Possibly he could 
use the same shared secret with Alice as with Carol, but that has the disadvantage that then 
Carol and Alice could impersonate Bob to each other. Public key technology is much more 
convenient. Bob only needs to remember a single secret, his own private key. It is true that if 
Bob wants to be able to verify the identity of thousands of entities, then he will need to know (or 
be able to obtain when necessary) thousands of public keys. In Chapter 13 PKI (Public Key 
Infrastructure) we discuss how this might be done. Here’s an example of how Alice can use 
public key cryptography for verifying Bob’s identity assuming Alice knows Bob’s public key. 
Alice chooses a random number r, encrypts it using Bob’s public key eB, and sends the result to 
Bob. Bob proves he knows dB by decrypting the message and sending r back to Alice. Another 
advantage of public key authentication is that Alice does not need to keep any secret 
information in order to verify Bob. For instance, Alice might be a computer system in which 
backup tapes are unencrypted and easily stolen. With secret key based authentication, if Carol 
stole a backup tape and read the key that Alice shares with Bob, she could then trick Bob into 
thinking she was Alice (or trick Alice into thinking she was Bob). In contrast, with public key 
based authentication, the only information on Alice’s backup tapes is public key information, 
and that cannot be used to impersonate Bob. Alice Bob encrypt r using eB decrypt to r using dB 
r 48 INTRODUCTION TO CRYPTOGRAPHY 2.5.5 2.5.5 Digital Signatures Forged in USA engraved 
on a screwdriver claiming to be of brand Craftsman It is often useful to prove that a message 
was generated by a particular individual. This is easy with public key technology. Bob’s 
signature for a message m can only be generated by someone with knowledge of Bob’s private 
key. And the signature depends on the contents of m. If m is modified in any way, the signature 
no longer matches. So digital signatures provide two important functions. They prove who 
generated the information, and they prove that the information has not been modified in any 
way by anyone since the message and matching signature were generated. Digital signatures 
offer an important advantage over secret key based cryptographic MACs— non-repudiation. 
Suppose Bob sells widgets and Alice routinely buys them. Alice and Bob might agree that rather 
than placing orders through the mail with signed purchase orders, Alice will send electronic 
mail messages to order widgets. To protect against someone forging orders and causing Bob to 
manufacture more widgets than Alice actually needs, Alice will include a message integrity 
code on her messages. This could be either a secret key based MAC or a public key based 
signature. But suppose sometime after Alice places a big order, she changes her mind (the 
bottom fell out of the widget market). Since there’s a big penalty for canceling an order, she 


## Page 3

doesn’t fess up that she’s canceling, but instead denies that she ever placed the order. Bob 
sues. If Alice authenticated the message by computing a MAC based on a key she shares with 
Bob, Bob knows Alice really placed the order because nobody other than Bob and Alice know 
that key. If Bob knows he didn’t create the message he knows it must have been Alice. But he 
can’t prove it to anyone! Since he knows the same secret key that Alice used to sign the order, 
he could have forged the signature on the message himself and he can’t prove to the judge that 
he didn’t! If it was a public key signature, he can show the signed message to the judge and the 
judge can verify that it was signed with Alice’s key. Alice can still claim of course that someone 
must have stolen and misused her key (it might even be true!), but the contract between Alice 
and Bob could reasonably hold her responsible for damages caused by her inadequately 
protecting her key. Unlike secret key cryptography, where the keys are shared, you can always 
tell who’s responsible for a signature generated with a private key. 2.6 HASH ALGORITHMS 
Hash algorithms are also known as message digests or one-way transformations. A 
cryptographic hash function is a mathematical transformation that takes a message of arbitrary 
length (transformed into a string of bits) and computes from it a fixed-length (short) number. 
2.6.1 HASH ALGORITHMS 49 We’ll call the hash of a message m, h(m). It has the following 
properties: • For any message m, it is relatively easy to compute h(m). This just means that in 
order to be practical it can’t take a lot of processing time to compute the hash. • Given h(m), 
there is no way to find an m that hashes to h(m) in a way that is substantially easier than going 
through all possible values of m and computing h(m) for each one. • Even though it’s obvious 
that many different values of m will be transformed to the same value h(m) (because there are 
many more possible values of m), it is computationally infeasible to find two values that hash to 
the same thing. An example of the sort of function that might work is taking the message m, 
treating it as a number, adding some large constant, squaring it, and taking the middle n digits 
as the hash. You can see that while this would not be difficult to compute, it’s not obvious how 
you could find a message that would produce a particular hash, or how one might find two 
messages with the same hash. It turns out this is not a particularly good message digest 
function—we’ll give examples of secure message digest functions in Chapter 5 Hashes and 
Message Digests. But the basic idea of a message digest function is that the input is mangled so 
badly the process cannot be reversed. 2.6.1 Password Hashing When a user types a password, 
the system has to be able to determine whether the user got it right. If the system stores the 
passwords unencrypted, then anyone with access to the system storage or backup tapes can 
steal the passwords. Luckily, it is not necessary for the system to know a password in order to 
verify its correctness. (A proper password is like pornography. You can’t tell what it is, but you 
know it when you see it.) Instead of storing the password, the system can store a hash of the 
password. When a password is supplied, it computes the password’s hash and compares it 
with the stored value. If they match, the password is deemed correct. If the hashed password 
file is obtained by an attacker, it is not immediately useful because the passwords can’t be 
derived from the hashes. Historically, some systems made the password file publicly readable, 
an expression of confidence in the security of the hash. Even if there are no cryptographic flaws 
in the hash, it is possible to guess passwords and hash them to see if they match. If a user is 
careless and chooses a password that is guessable (say, a word that would appear in a 50000-
word dictionary or book of common names), an exhaustive search would “crack” the password 
even if the encryption were sound. For this reason, many systems hide the hashed password 
list (and those that don’t should). 50 INTRODUCTION TO CRYPTOGRAPHY 2.6.2 2.6.2 Message 
Integrity Cryptographic hash functions can be used to generate a MAC to protect the integrity of 
messages transmitted over insecure media in much the same way as secret key cryptography. 
If we merely sent the message and used the hash of the message as a MAC, this would not be 


## Page 4

secure, since the hash function is well-known. The bad guy can modify the message and 
compute a new hash for the new message, and transmit that. However, if Alice and Bob have 
agreed on a secret, Alice can use a hash to generate a MAC for a message to Bob by taking the 
message, concatenating the secret, and computing the hash of message|secret. This is called a 
keyed hash. Alice then sends the hash and the message (without the secret) to Bob. Bob 
concatenates the secret to the received message and computes the hash of the result. If that 
matches the received hash, Bob can have confidence the message was sent by someone 
knowing the secret. [Note: there are some cryptographic subtleties to making this actually 
secure; see §5.2.2 Computing a MAC with a Hash]. 2.6.3 Message Fingerprint If you want to 
know whether some large data structure (e.g. a program) has been modified from one day to the 
next, you could keep a copy of the data on some tamper-proof backing store and periodically 
compare it to the active version. With a hash function, you can save storage: you simply save 
the message digest of the data on the tamper-proof backing store (which because the hash is 
small could be a piece of paper in a filing cabinet). If the message digest hasn’t changed, you 
can be confident none of the data has. A note to would-be users—if it hasn’t already occurred 
to you, it has occurred to the bad guys—the program that computes the hash must also be 
independently protected for this to be secure. Otherwise the bad guys can change the file but 
also change the hashing program to report the checksum as though the file were unchanged! 
message secret hash hash = ? secret Alice Bob 2.6.4 HOMEWORK 51 2.6.4 Downline Load 
Security It is common practice to have special-purpose devices connected to a network, like 
routers or printers, that do not have the nonvolatile memory to store the programs they 
normally run. Instead, they keep a bootstrap program smart enough to get a program from the 
network and run it. This scheme is called downline load. Suppose you want to downline load a 
program and make sure it hasn’t been corrupted (whether intentionally or not). If you know the 
proper hash of the program, you can compute the hash of the loaded program and make sure it 
has the proper value before running the program. 2.6.5 Digital Signature Efficiency The best-
known public key algorithms are sufficiently processor-intensive that it is desirable to compute 
a message digest of the message and sign that, rather than to sign the message directly. The 
message digest algorithms are much less processor-intensive, and the message digest is much 
shorter than the message. 2.7 HOMEWORK 1. What is the dedication to this book? 2. Random J. 
Protocol-Designer has been told to design a scheme to prevent messages from being modified 
by an intruder. Random J. decides to append to each message a hash of that message. Why 
doesn’t this solve the problem? (We know of a protocol that uses this technique in an attempt 
to gain security.) 3. Suppose Alice, Bob, and Carol want to use secret key technology to 
authenticate each other. If they all used the same secret key K, then Bob could impersonate 
Carol to Alice (actually any of the three can impersonate the other to the third). Suppose 
instead that each had their own secret key, so Alice uses KA, Bob uses KB, and Carol uses KC. 
This means that each one, to prove his or her identity, responds to a challenge with a function of 
his or her secret key and the challenge. Is this more secure than having them all use the same 
secret key K? (Hint: what does Alice need to know in order to verify Carol’s answer to Alice’s 
challenge?) 4. As described in §2.6.4 Downline Load Security, it is common, for performance 
reasons, to sign a message digest of a message rather than the message itself. Why is it so 
important that it be difficult to find two messages with the same message digest? 52 
INTRODUCTION TO CRYPTOGRAPHY 2.7 5. What’s wrong with the protocol in §2.4.4 
Authentication? (Hint: assume Alice can open two connections to Bob.) 6. Assume a 
cryptographic algorithm in which the performance for the good guys (the ones that know the 
key) grows linearly with the length of the key, and for which the only way to break it is a brute-
force attack of trying all possible keys. Suppose the performance for the good guys is adequate 


## Page 5

(e.g., it can encrypt and decrypt as fast as the bits can be transmitted over the wire) at a certain 
size key. Then suppose advances in computer technology make computers twice as fast. Given 
that both the good guys and the bad guys get faster computers, does this advance in computer 
speed work to the advantage of the good guys, the bad guys, or does it not make any difference? 
53 3 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.1 INTRODUCTION This chapter describes how secret key 
cryptographic algorithms work. It describes in detail the DES and IDEA algorithms. These 
algorithms take a fixed-length block of message (64 bits in the case of both DES and IDEA), a 
fixed-length key (56 bits for DES and 128 bits for IDEA) and generate a block of output (the same 
length as the input). In general, a message won’t happen to be 64 bits long. In §4.2 Encrypting a 
Large Message we’ll discuss how to convert the basic fixed-length block encryption algorithm 
into a general message encryption algorithm. 3.2 GENERIC BLOCK ENCRYPTION A 
cryptographic algorithm converts a plaintext block into an encrypted block. It’s fairly obvious 
that if the key length is too short (for instance, 4 bits), the cryptographic scheme would not be 
secure because it would be too easy to search through all possible keys. There’s a similar issue 
with the length of the block of plaintext to be encrypted. If the block length is too short (say one 
octet, as in a monoalphabetic cipher), then if you ever had some paired 〈plaintext, ciphertext〉, 
you could construct a table to be used for decryption. It might be possible to obtain such pairs 
because messages might only remain secret for a short time, perhaps because the message 
says where the army will attack the next day. Having a block length too long is merely 
inconvenient—unnecessarily complex and possibly having performance penalties. 64 bits is a 
reasonable length, in that you are unlikely to get that many blocks of 〈plaintext,ciphertext〉 
pairs, and even if you did, it would take too much space to store the table (264 entries of 64 bits 
each) or too much time to sort it for efficient searching. The most general way of encrypting a 
64-bit block is to take each of the 264 input values and map it to a unique one of the 264 output 
values. (It is necessary that the mapping be one-to-one, i.e. 54 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 
3.2 only one input value maps to any given output value, since otherwise decryption would not 
be possible.) Suppose Alice and Bob (who happen to speak a language in which all sentences 
are 64 bits long) want to decide upon a mapping that they can use for encrypting their 
conversations. How would they specify one? To specify a monoalphabetic cipher with English 
letters takes 26 specifications of 26 possible values, approximately. For instance, How would 
you specify a mapping of all possible 64-bit input values? Well, let’s start: Hmm, we probably 
don’t want to write this all out. There are 264 possible input values and for each one we have to 
specify a 64-bit output value. This would take 270 bits. (Actually, nitpickers might note that 
there aren’t quite 270 bits of information since the mapping has to be a permutation, i.e., each 
output value is used exactly once, so for instance the final output value does not need to be 
explicitly specified—it’s the one that’s left over. However, there are 264! different possible 
permutations of 264 values, which would take more than 269 bits to represent.) [Remember n! 
(read “n factorial”) is n⋅(n−1)⋅(n−2)⋅(n−3)⋅⋅⋅3⋅2⋅1. It can be approximated by Stirling’s formula: ] 
So let’s say it would take 269 bits to specify the mapping. That 269 bit number would act like a 
secret key that Alice and Bob would share. But it is doubtful that they could remember a key 
that large, or even be able to say it to each other within a lifetime, or store it on anything. So this 
is not particularly practical. Secret key cryptographic systems are designed to take a 
reasonable-length key (i.e., more like 64 bits than 264 bits) and generate a one-to-one mapping 
that looks, to someone who does not know the key, completely random. Random means that it 
should look, to someone who doesn’t know the key, as if the mapping from an input value to an 
output value were generated by using a random number generator. (To get the mapping from 
input i to output o, flip a 264-sided coin to choose the value of o—or if such a coin is not readily 
available, a single coin could be flipped 64 times. Since the mapping must be one-to-one, you’ll 


## Page 6

have to start over again choosing o if the value selected by the coin has been previously used.) If 
the mapping were truly random, any single bit change to the input will result in a totally 
independently chosen random number output. The two different output numbers should have 
no correlation, meaning that about half the bits should be the same and about half the bits 
should be different. For instance, it can’t be the case that the 3rd bit of output always changes if 
the 12th bit of input changes. So the cryptographic algorithms are designed to spread bits a→q 
b→d c→w d→x e→a f→f g→z h→b etc. 0000000000000000→8ad1482703f217ce 
0000000000000001→b33dc8710928d701 0000000000000002→29e856b28013fa4c n ne n n n ! ≈ 
− 2π 3.2 GENERIC BLOCK ENCRYPTION 55 around, in the sense that a single input bit should 
have influence on all the bits of the output, and be able to change any one of them with a 
probability of about 50% (depending on the values of the other 63 bits of input). There are two 
kinds of simple transformations one might imagine on a block of data, and they are named in 
the literature as substitutions and permutations (which is the only reason we are using those 
names—we would have chosen different words, perhaps the term bit shuffle instead of 
permutation). Let’s assume we are encrypting k-bit blocks: A substitution specifies, for each of 
the 2k possible values of the input, the k-bit output. As noted above, this would be impractical 
to build for 64-bit blocks, but would be possible with blocks of length, say, 8 bits. To specify a 
completely randomly chosen substitution for k-bit blocks would take about k⋅2k bits. A 
permutation specifies, for each of the k input bits, the output position to which it goes. For 
instance, the 1st bit might become the 13th bit of output, the 2nd bit would become the 61st bit 
of output, and so on. To specify a completely randomly chosen permutation of k bits would take 
about k log2k bits (for each of the k bits, one has to specify which bit position it will be in the 
output, and it only takes log2k bits to specify k values). A permutation is a special case of a 
substitution in which each bit of the output gets its value from exactly one of the bits of the 
input. The number of permutations is sufficiently small that it is possible to specify and build an 
arbitrary 64-bit permuter. One possible way to build a secret key algorithm is to break the input 
into manageable-sized chunks (say 8 bits), do a substitution on each small chunk, and then 
take the outputs of all the substitutions and run them through a permuter that is as big as the 
input, which shuffles the bits around. Then the process is repeated, so that each bit winds up as 
input to each of the substitutions. (See Figure 3-1.) Each time through is known as a round. If we 
do only a single round, then a bit of input can only affect 8 bits of output, since each input bit 
goes into only one of the substitutions. On the second round, the 8 bits affected by a particular 
input bit get spread around due to the permutation, and assuming each of those 8 bits goes into 
a different substitution, then the single input bit will affect all the output bits. Just as when 
shuffling a deck of cards, there is an optimal number of rounds (shuffles). Once the cards are 
sufficiently randomized, extra shuffles just waste time. Part of the design of an algorithm is 
determining the best number of rounds (for optimal security, at least enough rounds to 
randomize as much as possible; for efficiency reasons no more rounds than necessary). 
Another important feature of an encryption mechanism is it must be efficient to reverse, given 
the key. An algorithm like the one above would take the same effort to decrypt as to encrypt, 
since each of the steps can be run as efficiently backwards as forwards. 56 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3 3.3 DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) DES was published in 1977 by 
the National Bureau of Standards (since renamed to the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology) for use in commercial and unclassified (hmm…) U.S. Government applications. It 
was designed by IBM based on their own Lucifer cipher and input from NSA. DES uses a 56-bit 
key, and maps a 64-bit input block into a 64-bit output block. The key actually looks like a 64-bit 
quantity, but one bit in each of the 8 octets is used for odd parity on each octet. Therefore, only 
7 of the bits in each octet are actually meaningful as a key. DES is efficient to implement in 


## Page 7

hardware but relatively slow if implemented in software. Although making software 
implementations difficult was not a documented goal of DES, people have asserted that DES 
was specifically designed with this in mind, perhaps because this would limit its use to 
organizations that could afford hardware-based solutions, or perhaps because it made it easier 
to control access to the technology. At any rate, advances in CPUs have made it feasible to do 
DES in software. For instance, a 500-MIP CPU can encrypt at about 30 Koctets per second (and 
perhaps more depending on the details of the CPU design and the cleverness of the 
implementation). This is adequate for many applications. 64-bit input 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 
bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 8 bits 
64-bit intermediate 64-bit output Figure 3-1. Example of Block Encryption Loop for n rounds 
Eight 8-bit substitution functions derived from the key Divide input into eight 8-bit pieces 
Permute the bits, possibly based on the key 3.3 DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) 57 
Advances in semiconductor technology make the key-length issue more critical. Chip speeds 
have caught up so that DES keys can be broken with a bit of cleverness and exhaustive search. 
Perhaps a 64-bit key might have extended its useful lifetime by a few years. Given hardware 
price/performance improving about 40% per year, keys must grow by about 1 bit every 2 years. 
Assuming 56 bits was just sufficient in 1979 (when DES was standardized), 64 bits was about 
right in 1995, and 128 bits would suffice until 2123. Why 56 bits? Use of a 56-bit key is one of the 
most controversial aspects of DES. Even before DES was adopted, people outside of the 
intelligence community complained that 56 bits provided inadequate security [DENN82, 
DIFF76a, DIFF77, HELL79]. So why were only 56 of the 64 bits of a DES key used in the 
algorithm? The disadvantage of using 8 bits of the key for parity checking is that it makes DES 
considerably less secure (256 times less secure against exhaustive search). OK, so what is the 
advantage of using 8 bits of the key for parity? Well, uh, let’s say you receive a key 
electronically, and you want to sanity-check it to see if it could actually be a key. If you check 
the parity of the quantity, and it winds up not having the correct parity, then you’ll know 
something went wrong. There are two problems with this reasoning. One is that there is a 1 in 
256 chance (given the parity scheme) that even if you were to get 64 bits of garbage, that the 
result will happen to have the correct parity and therefore look like a key. That is way too large a 
possibility of error for it to afford any useful protection to any application. The other problem 
with the reasoning is that there is nothing terribly bad about getting a bad key. You’ll discover 
the key is bad when you try to use it for encrypting or decrypting. The key, at 56 bits, is pretty 
much universally acknowledged to be too small to be secure. Perhaps one might argue that a 
smaller key is an advantage because it saves storage— but that argument doesn’t hold since 
nobody does data compression on the 64-bit keys in order to fit them into 56 bits. So what 
benefits are there to usurping 8 bits for parity that offset the loss in security? People (not us, 
surely!) have suggested that our government consciously decided to weaken the security of 
DES just enough so that NSA would be able to break it. We would like to think there is an 
alternative explanation, but we have never heard a plausible one proposed. 58 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3.1 3.3.1 DES Overview DES is quite understandable, and has some very 
elegant tricks. Let’s start with the basic structure of DES (Figure 3-2). How secure is DES? 
Suppose you have a single block of 〈plaintext, ciphertext〉. Breaking DES in this case would 
mean finding a key that maps that plaintext to that ciphertext. With DES implemented in 
software, it would take on the order of half a million MIP-years, through brute force, to find the 
key. (Is it possible to find the “wrong” key, given a particular pair? Might two different keys map 
the same plaintext to the same ciphertext? How many keys on the average map a particular 
pair? See Homework Problem 3.) Often the attacker does not have a 〈plaintext, ciphertext〉 
block. Instead the attacker has a reasonable amount of ciphertext only. It might be known, for 


## Page 8

example, that the encrypted data is likely to be 7-bit ASCII. In that case, it is still just about as 
efficient to do brute-force search. The ciphertext is decrypted with the guessed key, and if all 
the 8th bits are zero (which will happen with an incorrect key with probability 1 in 256), then 
another block is decrypted. After several (say ten) blocks are decrypted, and the result always 
appears to be 7-bit ASCII, the key has a high probability of being correct. Current commercial 
DES chips do not lend themselves to doing exhaustive key search—they allow encrypting lots of 
data with a particular key. The relative speed of key loading is much less than the speed of 
encrypting data. However, it is straightforward to design and manufacture a key-searching DES 
chip. In 1977, Diffie and Hellman [DIFF77] did a detailed analysis of what it would cost to build a 
DES-breaking engine and concluded that for $20 million you could build a millionchip machine 
that could find a DES key in twelve hours (given a 〈plaintext, ciphertext〉 pair). In 1998, EFF 
(Electronic Frontier Foundation) [EFF98] built a special-purpose DES-breaking engine, called 
the EFF DES Cracker, for under $250K. It was designed to find a DES key in 4.5 days. With the 
design done, the cost of replicating the engine was under $150K. There are published papers 
[BIHA93] claiming that less straightforward attacks can break DES faster than simply searching 
the key space. However, these attacks involve the premise, unlikely in real-life situations, that 
the attacker can choose lots of plaintext and obtain the corresponding ciphertext. Still it is 
possible to encrypt multiple times with different keys (see §4.4 Multiple Encryption DES). It is 
generally believed that DES with triple encryption is 256 times as difficult to crack and therefore 
will be secure for the foreseeable future. 3.3.1 DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) 59 The 64-
bit input is subjected to an initial permutation to obtain a 64-bit result (which is just the input 
with the bits shuffled). The 56-bit key is used to generate sixteen 48-bit per-round keys, by 
taking a different 48-bit subset of the 56 bits for each of the keys. Each round takes as input the 
64- bit output of the previous round, and the 48-bit per-round key, and produces a 64-bit 
output. After the 16th round, the 64-bit output has its halves swapped and is then subjected to 
another permutation, which happens to be the inverse of the initial permutation. That is the 
overview of how encryption works. Decryption works by essentially running DES backwards. To 
decrypt a block, you’d first run it through the initial permutation to undo the final permutation 
(the initial and final permutations are inverses of each other). You’d do the same key 
generation, though you’d use the keys in the opposite order (first use K16, the key you 
generated last). Then you run 16 rounds just like for encryption. Why this works will be 
explained when we explain what happens during a round. After 16 rounds of decryption, the 
output has its halves swapped and is then subjected to the final permutation (to undo the initial 
permutation). To fully specify DES, we need to specify the initial and final permutations, how 
the per round keys are generated, and what happens during a round. Let’s start with the initial 
and final permutations of the data. 64-bit input 56-bit key Figure 3-2. Basic Structure of DES 
Initial Permutation Generate 16 per-round keys 48-bit K1 Round 1 48-bit K2 Round 2 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 
48-bit K16 Round 16 swap left and right halves Final Permutation 64-bit output 60 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3.2 3.3.2 The Permutations of the Data DES performs an initial and final 
permutation on the data, which do essentially nothing to enhance DES’s security (see Why 
permute? on page 61). The most plausible reason for these permutations is to make DES less 
efficient to implement in software. The way the permutations are specified in the DES spec is as 
follows: The numbers in the above tables specify the bit numbers of the input to the 
permutation. The order of the numbers in the tables corresponds to the output bit position. So 
for example, the initial permutation moves input bit 58 to output bit 1 and input bit 50 to output 
bit 2. The permutation is not a random-looking permutation. Figure 3-3 pictures it. The arrows 
indicate the initial permutation. Reverse the arrows to get the final permutation. We hope you 
appreciate the time we spent staring at the numbers and discovering this completely useless 


## Page 9

structure. Initial Permutation (IP) Final Permutation (IP−1) 58 50 42 34 26 18 10 2 40 8 48 16 56 
24 64 32 60 52 44 36 28 20 12 4 39 7 47 15 55 23 63 31 62 54 46 38 30 22 14 6 38 6 46 14 54 22 62 
30 64 56 48 40 32 24 16 8 37 5 45 13 53 21 61 29 57 49 41 33 25 17 9 1 36 4 44 12 52 20 60 28 59 
51 43 35 27 19 11 3 35 3 43 11 51 19 59 27 61 53 45 37 29 21 13 5 34 2 42 10 50 18 58 26 63 55 47 
39 31 23 15 7 33 1 41 9 49 17 57 25 input bit output bit 12345678 12345678 octet 1 ABCDEFGH 
B 2 D 3 F 4 H 5 A 6 C 7 E 8 G Figure 3-3. Initial Permutation of Data Block 3.3.3 DATA 
ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) 61 The input is 8 octets. The output is 8 octets. The bits in the 
first octet of input get spread into the 8th bits of each of the octets. The bits in the second octet 
of input get spread into the 7th bits of all the octets. And in general, the bits of the i th octet get 
spread into the (9−i)th bits of all the octets. The pattern of spreading of the 8 bits in octet i of the 
input among the output octets is that the evennumbered bits go into octets 1–4, and the odd-
numbered bits go into octets 5–8. Note that if the data happens to be 7-bit ASCII, with the top 
bit set to zero, then after the permutation the entire 5th octet will be zero. Since the 
permutation appears to have no security value, it seems nearly certain that there is no security 
significance to this particular permutation. 3.3.3 Generating the Per-Round Keys Next we’ll 
specify how the sixteen 48-bit per-round keys are generated from the DES key. The DES key 
looks like it’s 64 bits long, but 8 of the bits are parity. Let’s number the bits of the DES key from 
left to right as 1, 2,…64. Bits 8, 16,…64 are the parity bits. DES performs a function, which we 
are about to specify, on these 64 bits to generate sixteen 48-bit keys, which are K1, K2,…K16. 
First it does an initial permutation on the 56 useful bits of the key, to generate a 56-bit output, 
which it divides into two 28-bit values, called C0 and D0. The permutation is specified as Why 
permute? Why can’t the initial and final permutations of the data be of security value? Well, 
suppose they were important, i.e., if DES did not have them it would be possible to break DES. 
Let’s call a modified DES that does not have the initial and final permutation EDS. Let’s say we 
can break EDS, i.e., given a 〈plaintext,ciphertext〉 EDS pair, we can easily calculate the EDS key 
that converts the plaintext into the ciphertext. In that case, we can easily break DES as well. 
Given a DES 〈plaintext,ciphertext〉 pair 〈m,c〉, we simply do the inverse of the initial permutation 
(i.e. the final permutation) on m to get m′, and the inverse of the final permutation (i.e. the initial 
permutation) on c to get c′, and feed 〈m′,c′〉 to our EDS-breaking code. The resulting EDS key 
will work as the DES key for 〈m,c〉. Note that when multiple encryptions of DES are being 
performed, the permutation might have some value. However, if encryption with key1 is 
followed by encryption with key2, then the final permutation following encryption with key1 will 
cancel the initial permutation for key2. That is one of the reasons people discuss alternating 
encrypt operations with decrypt operations (see §4.4 Multiple Encryption DES). In §3.3.3 
Generating the Per-Round Keys, we’ll see there is also a permutation of the key. It also has no 
security value (by a similar argument). 62 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3.3 The way to read 
the table above is that the leftmost bit of the output is obtained by extracting bit 57 from the 
key. The next bit is bit 49 of the key, and so forth, with the final bit of D0 being bit 4 of the key. 
Notice that none of the parity bits (8, 16,…64) is used in C0 or D0. This permutation is not 
random. Figure 3-4 pictures it. Feel free to draw in any arrows or other graphic aids to make it 
clearer. The initial and final permutations of the bits in the key have no security value (just like 
the initial and final permutations of the data), so the permutations didn’t have to be random—
the identity permutation would have done nicely. Now the generation of the Ki proceeds in 16 
rounds (see Figure 3-5). The number of bits shifted is different in the different rounds. In rounds 
1, 2, 9, and 16, it is a single-bit rotate left (with C0 D0 57 49 41 33 25 17 9 63 55 47 39 31 23 15 1 
58 50 42 34 26 18 7 62 54 46 38 30 22 10 2 59 51 43 35 27 14 6 61 53 45 37 29 19 11 3 60 52 44 36 
21 13 5 28 20 12 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 ⇒ 57 49 41 33 25 17 9 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1 58 50 42 34 26 18 17 
18 19 20 21 22 23 10 2 59 51 43 35 27 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 19 11 3 60 52 44 36 33 34 35 36 37 38 


## Page 10

39 63 55 47 39 31 23 15 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 7 62 54 46 38 30 22 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 14 6 61 53 
45 37 29 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 21 13 5 28 20 12 4 Figure 3-4. Initial Permutation of Key loop back 
for next round Ci−1 Di−1 rotate left rotate left 1 4 Ci Di 2 9 3 2 Ki Figure 3-5. Round i for 
generating Ki 3.3.4 DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) 63 the bit shifted off the left end 
carried around and shifted into the right end). In the other rounds, it is a two-bit rotate left. The 
permutations in this case are likely to be of some security value. The permutation of Ci that 
produces the left half of Ki is the following. Note that bits 9, 18, 22, and 25 are discarded. The 
permutation of the rotated Di−1 that produces the right half of Ki is as follows (where the bits of 
the rotated Di−1 are numbered 29, 30,…56, and bits 35, 38, 43, and 54 are discarded). Each of 
the halves of Ki is 24 bits, so Ki is 48 bits long. 3.3.4 A DES Round Now let’s look at what a single 
round of DES does. Figure 3-6 shows both how encryption and decryption work. In encryption, 
the 64-bit input is divided into two 32-bit halves called Ln and Rn. The round generates as 
output 32-bit quantities Ln+1 and Rn+1. The concatenation of Ln+1 and Rn+1 is the 64- bit 
output of the round. Ln+1 is simply Rn. Rn+1 is obtained as follows. First Rn and Kn are input to 
what we call a mangler function, which outputs a 32-bit quantity. That quantity is ⊕’d with Ln to 
obtain the new Rn+1. The mangler takes as input 32 bits of the data plus 48 bits of the key to 
produce a 32-bit output. Given the above, suppose you want to run DES backward, i.e. to 
decrypt something. Suppose you know Ln+1 and Rn+1. How do you get Ln and Rn? Well, Rn is 
just Ln+1. Now you know Rn, Ln+1, Rn+1 and Kn. You also know that Rn+1 equals Ln ⊕ 
mangler(Rn, Kn). You can compute mangler(Rn, Kn), since you know Rn and Kn. Now ⊕ that 
with Rn+1. The result will be Ln. Note that the mangler is never run backwards. DES is elegantly 
designed to be reversible without constraining the mangler function to be reversible. This 
design is permutation to obtain the left half of Ki: 14 17 11 24 1 5 3 28 15 6 21 10 23 19 12 4 26 8 
16 7 27 20 13 2 permutation to obtain the right half of Ki: 41 52 31 37 47 55 30 40 51 45 33 48 44 
49 39 56 34 53 46 42 50 36 29 32 64 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3.5 due to Feistel [FEIS73]. 
Theoretically the mangler could map all values to zero, and it would still be possible to run DES 
backwards, but having the mangler function map all functions to zero would make DES pretty 
unsecure (see Homework Problem 5). If you examine Figure 3-6 carefully, you will see that 
decryption is identical to encryption with the 32-bit halves swapped. In other words, feeding 
Rn+1|Ln+1 into round n produces Rn |Ln as output. 3.3.5 The Mangler Function The mangler 
function takes as input the 32-bit Rn, which we’ll simply call R, and the 48-bit Kn, which we’ll 
call K, and produces a 32-bit output which, when ⊕’d with Ln, produces Rn+1 (the next R). The 
mangler function first expands R from a 32-bit value to a 48-bit value. It does this by breaking R 
into eight 4-bit chunks and then expanding each of those chunks to 6 bits by taking the 64-bit 
input 32-bit Ln 32-bit Rn Mangler Function Kn ⊕ 32-bit Ln+1 32-bit Rn+1 64-bit output 
Encryption 64-bit output 32-bit Ln 32-bit Rn Mangler Function Kn ⊕ 32-bit Ln+1 32-bit Rn+1 64-
bit input Decryption Figure 3-6. DES Round 3.3.5 DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) 65 
adjacent bits and concatenating them to the chunk. The leftmost and rightmost bits of R are 
considered adjacent. The 48-bit K is broken into eight 6-bit chunks. Chunk i of the expanded R is 
⊕’d with chunk i of K to yield a 6-bit output. That 6-bit output is fed into an S-box, a substitution 
which produces a 4-bit output for each possible 6-bit input. Since there are 64 possible input 
values (6 bits) and only 16 possible output values (4 bits), the S-box clearly maps several input 
values to the same output value. As it turns out, there are exactly four input values that map to 
each possible output value. There’s even more pattern to it than that. Each S-box could be 
thought of as four separate 4-bit to 4- Figure 3-7. Expansion of R to 48 bits chunk i of R chunk i of 
K ⊕ S-Box i Figure 3-8. Chunk Transformation 66 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3.5 bit S-
boxes, with the inner 4 bits of the 6-bit chunk serving as input, and the outer 2 bits selecting 
which of the four 4-bit S-boxes to use. The S-boxes are specified as follows: Input bits 1 and 6 


## Page 11

Input bits 2 thru 5 ↓ 0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 
1101 1110 1111 00 1110 0100 1101 0001 0010 1111 1011 1000 0011 1010 0110 1100 0101 1001 
0000 0111 01 0000 1111 0111 0100 1110 0010 1101 0001 1010 0110 1100 1011 1001 0101 0011 
1000 10 0100 0001 1110 1000 1101 0110 0010 1011 1111 1100 1001 0111 0011 1010 0101 0000 
11 1111 1100 1000 0010 0100 1001 0001 0111 0101 1011 0011 1110 1010 0000 0110 1101 
Figure 3-9. Table of 4-bit outputs of S-box 1 (bits 1 thru 4) Input bits 7 and 12 Input bits 8 thru 11 
↓ 0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 1111 00 
1111 0001 1000 1110 0110 1011 0011 0100 1001 0111 0010 1101 1100 0000 0101 1010 01 0011 
1101 0100 0111 1111 0010 1000 1110 1100 0000 0001 1010 0110 1001 1011 0101 10 0000 1110 
0111 1011 1010 0100 1101 0001 0101 1000 1100 0110 1001 0011 0010 1111 11 1101 1000 1010 
0001 0011 1111 0100 0010 1011 0110 0111 1100 0000 0101 1110 1001 Figure 3-10. Table of 4-
bit outputs of S-box 2 (bits 5 thru 8) Input bits 13 and 18 Input bits 14 thru 17 ↓ 0000 0001 0010 
0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 1111 00 1010 0000 1001 1110 
0110 0011 1111 0101 0001 1101 1100 0111 1011 0100 0010 1000 01 1101 0111 0000 1001 0011 
0100 0110 1010 0010 1000 0101 1110 1100 1011 1111 0001 10 1101 0110 0100 1001 1000 1111 
0011 0000 1011 0001 0010 1100 0101 1010 1110 0111 11 0001 1010 1101 0000 0110 1001 1000 
0111 0100 1111 1110 0011 1011 0101 0010 1100 Figure 3-11. Table of 4-bit outputs of S-box 3 
(bits 9 thru 12) Input bits 19 and 24 Input bits 20 thru 23 ↓ 0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 0110 
0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 1111 00 0111 1101 1110 0011 0000 0110 1001 1010 
0001 0010 1000 0101 1011 1100 0100 1111 01 1101 1000 1011 0101 0110 1111 0000 0011 0100 
0111 0010 1100 0001 1010 1110 1001 10 1010 0110 1001 0000 1100 1011 0111 1101 1111 0001 
0011 1110 0101 0010 1000 0100 11 0011 1111 0000 0110 1010 0001 1101 1000 1001 0100 0101 
1011 1100 0111 0010 1110 Figure 3-12. Table of 4-bit outputs of S-box 4 (bits 13 thru 16) 3.3.5 
DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD (DES) 67 The 4-bit output of each of the eight S-boxes is 
combined into a 32-bit quantity whose bits are then permuted. A permutation at this point is of 
security value to DES in order to ensure that the bits of the output of an S-box on one round of 
DES affects the input of multiple S-boxes on the next round. Without the permutation, an input 
bit on the left would mostly affect the output bits on the left. Input bits 25 and 30 Input bits 26 
thru 29 ↓ 0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 
1111 00 0010 1100 0100 0001 0111 1010 1011 0110 1000 0101 0011 1111 1101 0000 1110 1001 
01 1110 1011 0010 1100 0100 0111 1101 0001 0101 0000 1111 1010 0011 1001 1000 0110 10 
0100 0010 0001 1011 1010 1101 0111 1000 1111 1001 1100 0101 0110 0011 0000 1110 11 1011 
1000 1100 0111 0001 1110 0010 1101 0110 1111 0000 1001 1010 0100 0101 0011 Figure 3-13. 
Table of 4-bit outputs of S-box 5 (bits 17 thru 20) Input bits 31 and 36 Input bits 32 thru 35 ↓ 
0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 1111 00 1100 
0001 1010 1111 1001 0010 0110 1000 0000 1101 0011 0100 1110 0111 0101 1011 01 1010 1111 
0100 0010 0111 1100 1001 0101 0110 0001 1101 1110 0000 1011 0011 1000 10 1001 1110 1111 
0101 0010 1000 1100 0011 0111 0000 0100 1010 0001 1101 1011 0110 11 0100 0011 0010 1100 
1001 0101 1111 1010 1011 1110 0001 0111 0110 0000 1000 1101 Figure 3-14. Table of 4-bit 
outputs of S-box 6 (bits 21 thru 24) Input bits 37 and 42 Input bits 38 thru 41 ↓ 0000 0001 0010 
0011 0100 0101 0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 1111 00 0100 1011 0010 1110 
1111 0000 1000 1101 0011 1100 1001 0111 0101 1010 0110 0001 01 1101 0000 1011 0111 0100 
1001 0001 1010 1110 0011 0101 1100 0010 1111 1000 0110 10 0001 0100 1011 1101 1100 0011 
0111 1110 1010 1111 0110 1000 0000 0101 1001 0010 11 0110 1011 1101 1000 0001 0100 1010 
0111 1001 0101 0000 1111 1110 0010 0011 1100 Figure 3-15. Table of 4-bit outputs of S-box 7 
(bits 25 thru 28) Input bits 43 and 48 Input bits 44 thru 47 ↓ 0000 0001 0010 0011 0100 0101 
0110 0111 1000 1001 1010 1011 1100 1101 1110 1111 00 1101 0010 1000 0100 0110 1111 1011 
0001 1010 1001 0011 1110 0101 0000 1100 0111 01 0001 1111 1101 1000 1010 0011 0111 0100 


## Page 12

1100 0101 0110 1011 0000 1110 1001 0010 10 0111 1011 0100 0001 1001 1100 1110 0010 0000 
0110 1010 1101 1111 0011 0101 1000 11 0010 0001 1110 0111 0100 1010 1000 1101 1111 1100 
1001 0000 0011 0101 0110 1011 Figure 3-16. Table of 4-bit outputs of S-box 8 (bits 29 thru 32) 
68 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.3.6 The actual permutation used is very random looking (we 
can’t find any nice patterns to make the permutation easy to visualize—it’s possible a non-
random looking permutation would not be as secure). The way to read this is that the 1st bit of 
output of the permutation is the 16th input bit, the 2nd output bit is the 7th input bit,…the 32nd 
output bit is the 25th input bit. 3.3.6 Weak and Semi-Weak Keys We include this section mainly 
for completeness. There are sixteen DES keys that the security community warns people 
against using, because they have strange properties. But the probability of randomly generating 
one of these keys is only 16/256, which in our opinion is nothing to worry about. It’s probably 
equally insecure to use a key with a value less than a thousand, since an attacker might be 
likely to start searching for keys from the bottom. Remember from §3.3.3 Generating the Per-
Round Keys that the key is subjected to an initial permutation to generate two 28-bit quantities, 
C0 and D0. The sixteen suspect keys are ones for which C0 and D0 are one of the four values: 
all ones, all zeroes, alternating ones and zeroes, alternating zeroes and ones. Since there are 
four possible values for each half, there are sixteen possibilities in all. The four weak keys are 
the ones for which each of C0 and D0 are all ones or all zeroes. Weak keys are their own 
inverses.* The remaining twelve keys are the semi-weak keys. Each is the inverse of one of the 
others. 3.3.7 What’s So Special About DES? DES is actually quite simple, as is IDEA (which we’ll 
explain next). One gets the impression that anyone could design a secret key encryption 
algorithm. Just take the bits, shuffle them, shuffle them some more, and you have an algorithm. 
In fact, however, these things are very mysterious. For example, the S-boxes seem totally 
arbitrary. Did anyone put any thought into exactly what substitutions each S-box should 
perform? Well, Biham and Shamir [BIHA91] have shown that with an incredibly trivial change to 
DES consisting of swapping S-box 3 with S-box 7, DES is about an order of magnitude less 
secure in the face of a specific (admittedly not very likely) attack. *Two keys are inverses if 
encrypting with one is the same as decrypting with the other. 16 7 20 21 29 12 28 17 1 15 23 26 5 
18 31 10 2 8 24 14 32 27 3 9 19 13 30 6 22 11 4 25 Figure 3-17. Permutation of the 32 bits from 
the S-boxes 3.4 INTERNATIONAL DATA ENCRYPTION ALGORITHM (IDEA) 69 It is unfortunate 
that the design process for DES was not more public. We don’t know if the particular details 
were well-chosen for strength, whether someone flipped coins, for instance, to construct the S-
boxes, or even whether the particular details were well-chosen to have some sort of weakness 
that could only be exploited by someone involved in the design process. The claim for why the 
design process was kept secret, and it is a plausible claim, is that the DES designers knew 
about many kinds of cryptanalytic attacks, and that they specifically designed DES to be strong 
against all the ones they knew about. If they publicized the design process, they’d have to 
divulge all the cryptanalytic attacks they knew about, which would then further educate 
potential bad guys, which might make some cryptographic standards that were designed 
without this knowledge vulnerable. In the hash algorithms designed by Ron Rivest (MD2, MD4, 
MD5), in order to eliminate the suspicion that they might be specifically chosen to have secret 
weaknesses, constants that should be reasonably random were chosen through some 
demonstrable manner, for instance by being the digits of an irrational number such as . 3.4 
INTERNATIONAL DATA ENCRYPTION ALGORITHM (IDEA) IDEA (International Data Encryption 
Algorithm) was originally called IPES (Improved Proposed Encryption Standard). It was 
developed by Xuejia Lai and James L. Massey of ETH Zuria. IDEA was designed to be efficient to 
compute in software. It encrypts a 64-bit block of plaintext into a 64-bit block of ciphertext 
using a 128-bit key. It was published in 1991, so cryptanalysts have had time to find 


## Page 13

weaknesses. So far none has been found, at least by the good guys (the ones who would 
publish their results). IDEA is similar to DES in some ways. Both of them operate in rounds, and 
both have a complicated mangler function that does not have to be reversible in order for 
decryption to work. Instead, the mangler function is run in the same direction for encryption as 
decryption, in both IDEA and DES. In fact, both DES and IDEA have the property that encryption 
and decryption are identical except for key expansion. With DES, the same keys are used in the 
reverse order (see Homework Problem 11); with IDEA, the encryption and decryption keys are 
related in a more complex manner. 3.4.1 Primitive Operations Each primitive operation in IDEA 
maps two 16-bit quantities into a 16-bit quantity. (In contrast, each DES S-box maps a 6-bit 
quantity into a 4-bit quantity.) IDEA uses three operations, all easy to 2 70 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.4.1 compute in software, to create a mapping. Furthermore, the operations 
are all reversible, which is important in order to run IDEA backwards (i.e., to decrypt). The 
operations are bitwise exclusive or (⊕), a slightly modified add (+), and a slightly modified 
multiply (⊗). The reason add and multiply can’t be used in the ordinary way is that the result 
has to be 16 bits, which won’t always be the case when adding or multiplying two 16-bit 
quantities. Addition in IDEA is done by throwing away carries, which is equivalent to saying 
addition is mod 216. Multiplication in IDEA is done by first calculating the 32-bit result, and then 
taking the remainder when divided by 216+1 (which can be done in a clever efficient manner). 
Multiplication mod 216+1 is reversible, in the sense that every number x between 1 and 216 has 
an inverse y (i.e., a number in the range 1 to 216 such that multiplication by y will “undo” 
multiplication by x), because 216+1 happens to be prime. There is one subtlety, though. The 
number 0, which can be expressed in 16 bits, would not have an inverse. And the number 216, 
which is in the proper range for mod 216+1 arithmetic, cannot be expressed in 16 bits. So both 
problems are solved by treating 0 as an encoding for 216. How are these operations reversible? 
Of course the operations are not reversible if all that is known is the 16-bit output. For instance, 
if we have inputs A and B, and perform ⊕ to obtain C, we can’t find A and B from C alone. 
However, when running IDEA backwards we will have C and B, and will use that to obtain A. ⊕ 
is easy. If you know B and C, then you can simply do B ⊕ C to get 64-bit input 128-bit key Figure 
3-18. Basic Structure of IDEA Key Expansion K1 K2 K3 K4 Round 1 K5 K6 Round 2 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ K49 
K50 K51 K52 Round 17 64-bit output 3.4.2 INTERNATIONAL DATA ENCRYPTION ALGORITHM 
(IDEA) 71 A. B is its own inverse with ⊕. + is easy, too. You compute −B (mod 216). If you know 
C and −B, then you can find A by doing C + −B. With ⊗ you find B−1 (mod 216+1) using Euclid’s 
algorithm— see §7.4 Euclid’s Algorithm, and you perform C ⊗ B−1 to get A. The only part of 
IDEA that isn’t necessarily reversible is the mangler function, and it is truly marvelous to note 
how IDEA’s design manages not to require a reversible mangler function (see §3.4.3.2 Even 
Round). 3.4.2 Key Expansion The 128-bit key is expanded into 52 16-bit keys, K1, K2,…K52. The 
key expansion is done differently for encryption than for decryption. Once the 52 keys are 
generated, the encryption and decryption operations are the same. The 52 encryption keys are 
generated by writing out the 128-bit key and, starting from the left, chopping off 16 bits at a 
time. This generates eight 16-bit keys (see Figure 3-19). The next eight keys are generated by 
starting at bit 25, and wrapping around to the beginning when the end is reached (see Figure 3-
20). The next eight keys are generated by offsetting 25 more bits, and so forth, until 52 keys are 
generated. The last offset starts at bit 23 and only needs 4 keys, so bits 1 thru 22 and bits 87 
thru 128 get used in keys once less than bits 23 thru 86. We’ll discuss how to generate the 52 
decryption keys after we finish describing IDEA. 128-bit key K1 K2 K3 K4 K5 K6 K7 K8 Figure 3-19. 
Generation of keys 1 through 8 128-bit key 128-bit key Figure 3-20. Generation of keys 9 through 
16 K9 K10 K11 K12 K13 K14 K15 K16 72 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.4.3 3.4.3 One Round 
Like DES, IDEA is performed in rounds. It has 17 rounds, where the odd-numbered rounds are 


## Page 14

different from the even-numbered rounds. (Note that in other descriptions of IDEA, it is 
described as having 8 rounds, where those rounds do the work of two of our rounds. Our 
explanation is functionally equivalent. It’s just that we think it’s clearer to explain it as having 17 
rounds.) Each round takes the input, a 64-bit quantity, and treats it as four 16-bit quantities, 
which we’ll call Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd. Mathematical functions are performed on Xa, Xb, Xc, Xd to 
yield new versions of Xa, Xb, Xc, Xd. The odd rounds use four of the Ki, which we’ll call Ka, Kb, 
Kc, and Kd. The even rounds use two Ki, which we’ll call Ke and Kf. So round one uses K1, K2, 
K3, K4 (i.e., in round 1, Ka = K1, Kb = K2, Kc = K3, Kd = K4). Round 2 uses K5 and K6 (i.e., in round 
2, Ke = K5 and Kf = K6). Round 3 uses K7, K8, K9, K10 (Ka = K7 etc.). Round 4 uses K11 and K12, 
and so forth. An odd round, therefore has as input Xa, Xb, Xc, Xd and keys Ka, Kb, Kc, Kd. An 
even round has as input Xa, Xb, Xc, Xd and keys Ke and Kf. 3.4.3.1 Odd Round The odd round is 
simple. Xa is replaced by Xa ⊗ Ka. Xd is replaced by Xd ⊗ Kd. Xc is replaced by Xb + Kb. Xb is 
replaced by Xc + Kc. Warning! If you’re actually going to implement this, we lied a bit above 
because there’s a strange quirk in IDEA. Possibly due to someone mixing up the labels on a 
diagram of IDEA, the keys K50 and K51 are swapped. That means that an implementation has to 
swap encryption keys K50 and K51 after generating them as described above. Xa Xb Xc Xd ⊗ Ka 
+ Kb + Kc ⊗ Kd Xa Xb Xc Xd Figure 3-21. IDEA Odd Round 3.4.3.2 INTERNATIONAL DATA 
ENCRYPTION ALGORITHM (IDEA) 73 Note that this is easily reversible. To get from the new Xa to 
the old Xa, we perform ⊗ with the multiplicative inverse of Ka, mod 216+1. Likewise with Xd. To 
get the old Xb, given the new Xc, we add the additive inverse of Kb, i.e., we subtract Kb. So when 
decrypting, the odd rounds run as before, but with the mathematical inverses of the keys. This 
will undo the work that was done during that round in encryption. 3.4.3.2 Even Round The even 
round is a little more complicated. Again, we have Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd. We have two keys, Ke and 
Kf. We’re going to first compute two values, which we’ll call Yin and Zin. We’ll do a function, 
which we’ll call the mangler function, which takes as input Yin, Zin, Ke, and Kf and produces 
what we’ll call Yout and Zout. We’ll use Yout and Zout to modify Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd. Yin = Xa ⊕ 
Xb Zin = Xc ⊕ Xd Yout = ((Ke ⊗ Yin) + Zin) ⊗ Kf Zout = (Ke ⊗ Yin) + Yout Now we compute the 
new Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd. new Xa = Xa ⊕ Yout new Xb = Xb ⊕ Yout new Xc = Xc ⊕ Zout new Xd = 
Xd ⊕ Zout Xa Xb Xc Xd Figure 3-22. IDEA Even Round ⊕ ⊕ Yin Zin Mangler Function Ke Kf Yout 
Zout ⊕ ⊕ Yout = ((Ke ⊗ Yin) + Zin) ⊗ Kf Zout = (Ke ⊗ Yin) + Yout ⊕ ⊕ Xa Xb Xc Xd 74 SECRET 
KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.4.4 How is the work of an even round reversed? This is truly spectacular 
(we don’t get out much). The even round is its own inverse! When performing decryption, the 
same keys are used as when performing encryption (not the mathematical inverses of the keys, 
as in the odd rounds). The even round takes as input the four quantities Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd, 
together with keys Ke and Kf, and produces new Xa, new Xb, new Xc, and new Xd. If new Xa, new 
Xb, new Xc, and new Xd (with the same Ke and Kf) are fed into the even round, the output is the 
old Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd. Why is this true? Note that new Xa = Xa ⊕ Yout and new Xb = Xb ⊕ Yout. 
In the beginning of the round, Xa and Xb are ⊕’d together, and the result is Yin, the input to the 
mangler function. What if we use new Xa and new Xb instead of Xa and Xb? (new Xa) ⊕ (new Xb) 
= (Xa ⊕ Yout) ⊕ (Xb ⊕ Yout) = Xa ⊕ Xb. So Yin will be the same, whether Xa and Xb are the 
inputs, or new Xa and new Xb are the inputs. The same is true for Xc and Xd. (Zin is the same 
value whether the inputs Xc and Xd are used, or inputs new Xc and new Xd are used.) So we’ve 
shown that the input to the mangler function is the same whether the input is Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd 
or whether the input is new Xa, new Xb, new Xc, and new Xd. That means the output of the 
mangler function will be the same whether you’re doing encryption (starting with Xa, etc.) or 
decryption (starting with new Xa, etc.). We called the outputs of the mangler function Yout and 
Zout. To get the first output of the round (new Xa, in the case of encryption), we take the first 
input (Xa) and ⊕ it with Yout. We’re going to show that with inputs of new Xa, new Xb, new Xc, 


## Page 15

and new Xd, the output of the round is Xa, Xb, Xc, and Xd, i.e., that running the round with the 
output results in getting the input back. We’ll use as inputs new Xa, new Xb, new Xc, and new 
Xd, and we know that Yout and Zout are the same as they would have been with inputs of Xa, 
Xb, Xc, and Xd. What happens in the round? The first output of the round is computed by taking 
the first input and ⊕ing it with Yout. We also know (from the encryption round) that new Xa = Xa 
⊕ Yout. first output = first input ⊕ Yout first output = (new Xa) ⊕ Yout first output = (Xa ⊕ Yout) 
⊕ Yout = Xa Magic! With an input of new Xa, we get an output of Xa. 3.4.4 Inverse Keys for 
Decryption IDEA is cleverly designed so that the same code (or hardware) can perform either 
encryption or decryption given different expanded keys. We want to compute inverse keys such 
that the encryption procedure, unmodified, will work as a decryption procedure. The basic idea 
is to take the inverses of the encryption keys and use them in the opposite order (use the 
inverse of the last-used encryption key as the first key used when doing decryption). 3.4.5 
ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES) 75 Remember that for encryption, we generated 52 
keys, K1 through K52. We use four of them in each of the odd rounds, and two of them in each 
of the even rounds. And since we are working backwards, the first decryption keys should be 
inverses of the last-used encryption keys. Given that the final keys used are K49, K50, K51, and 
K52, in an odd round, the first four decryption keys will be inverses of the keys K49–K52. K49 is 
used in ⊗, so the decryption key K1 will be the multiplicative inverse of K49 mod 216+1. And the 
decryption key K4 is the multiplicative inverse of K52. Decryption keys K2 and K3 are the 
additive inverses of K50 and K51 (meaning negative K50 and K51). In the even rounds, as we 
explained, the keys do not have to be inverted. The same keys are used for encryption as 
decryption. 3.4.5 Does IDEA Work? The definition of “working” is that decryption really does 
undo encryption, and that is easy to see. Whether it is secure or not depends on the 
Fundamental Tenet of Cryptography, as nobody has yet published results on how to break it. 
Certainly, breaking IDEA by exhaustive search for the 128-bit key requires currently 
unbelievable computing resources. 3.5 ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES) The world 
needed a new secret key standard. DES’s key was too small. Triple DES (3DES, see §4.4 
Multiple Encryption DES) was too slow. IDEA was encumbered (i.e., had patent protection), 
suspect, and slow. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) decided it wanted 
to facilitate creation of a new standard, but it had at least as difficult a political problem as a 
technical problem. Years of some branches of the U.S. government trying everything they could 
to hinder deployment of secure cryptography was likely to raise strong skepticism if a branch of 
the government stepped forward and said We’re from the government, and we’re here to help 
you develop and deploy strong crypto. The following quote gives a hint as to the deep 
resentment and mistrust that previous crypto export policies and the threat of domestic 
controls on encryption created. The NSA regularly lies to people who ask it for advice on export 
control. They have no reason not to; accomplishing their goal by any legal means is fine by 
them. Lying by government employees is legal. —John Gilmore 76 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.5.1 NIST really did want to help create an excellent new security standard. 
The new standard should be efficient, flexible, secure, and unencumbered (free to implement). 
But how could it help create one? Staying out of the picture wouldn’t help, since nobody else 
seemed to have the technical reputation and energy to lead the effort. Proposing an NSA-
designed cipher, designed in secret, wouldn’t work since everyone would speculate that there 
were trapdoors. So on January 2, 1997, NIST announced a contest to select a new encryption 
standard to be used for protecting sensitive, non-classified, U.S. government information. 
Proposals would be accepted from anyone, anywhere in the world. The candidate ciphers had 
to meet a bunch of requirements, including having a documented design rationale (and not just 
Here’s a bunch of transforms we do on the data). Then there were several years in which 


## Page 16

conferences were held for presentation of papers analyzing the candidates. There was a group 
of highly motivated cryptographers (the authors of submitted entries) looking for flaws in the 
proposals. And NIST also ran tests of the candidates for performance and other characteristics. 
After lots of investigation and discussion in the cryptographic community, NIST chose an 
algorithm called Rijndael, named after the two Belgian cryptographers who developed and 
submitted it—Dr. Joan Daemen of Proton World International and Dr. Vincent Rijmen, a 
postdoctoral researcher in the Electrical Engineering Department (ESAT) of Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven [DAE99]. As of 26 November 2001, AES, a standardization of Rijndael, is a 
Federal Information Processing Standard [FIPS01]. Rijndael provides for a variety of block and 
key sizes. These two parameters can be chosen independently from 128, 160, 192, 224, and 
256 bits. (in particular, key size and block size can be different). AES mandates a block size of 
128 bits, and a choice of key size from 128, 192, and 256 bits*, with the resulting versions 
imaginatively called AES-128, AES-192, and AES-256, respectively. We’ll describe Rijndael, 
mentioning the AES parameters explicitly from time to time. Rijndael is based on some 
beautiful mathematics, but we’ll leave the discussion of the mathematics to §8.5 Mathematics 
of Rijndael. Rijndael is similar to DES and IDEA in that there is a series of rounds which mangles 
a plaintext block into a ciphertext block, and a key expansion algorithm that takes the key and 
massages it into a bunch of round keys. 3.5.1 Basic Structure Rijndael allows a certain amount 
of flexibility by use of two independent parameters, with a third parameter derived from the 
other two: *We1,2 can’t imagine anyone using 192 bits. 256 is probably not necessary, since 
128 bits is really long enough. 256 gives “bragging rights” to those who believe more must be 
better and are willing to take a performance hit to claim their product is more secure because of 
having a larger key than the competitors. Anyone willing to take a performance hit in order to 
advertise a larger key will use 256 bits rather than 192. 3.5.1 ADVANCED ENCRYPTION 
STANDARD (AES) 77 • The block size, Nb. This is the number of 32-bit words (4-octet columns) 
in an encryption block. AES has Nb = 4, because its 128-bit block size is four 32-bit words. 4Nb 
octet input 4Nk octet key Figure 3-23. Basic Structure of Rijndael a0 a1 … Key Expansion a2 a3 
K0 ⊕ … Round 1 K1 ⊕ … ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ … Round NR KNr ⊕ … 4NB octet output 78 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.5.2 • The key size, Nk. This is the number of 32-bit words (4-octet columns) 
in an encryption key. AES-128 has Nk = 4, AES-192 has Nk = 6, AES-256 has Nk = 8. Rijndael 
allows any Nk between 4 and 8 inclusive. • The number of rounds Nr . This parameter is a 
function of the other two parameters. The number of rounds needs to be larger for longer keys 
so that breaking the encryption is as difficult as a brute-force attack at that key size. The 
number of rounds needs to be larger for bigger block sizes (and key sizes) to allow sufficient 
mixing so that each bit of a plaintext block (or key) has a complex effect on each bit of the 
resulting ciphertext block. So Rijndael specifies that Nr = 6 + max(Nb, Nk). This means that AES-
128 has ten rounds, AES-192 has twelve rounds, and AES-256 has fourteen rounds. Rijndael 
(Figure 3-23) keeps a rectangular array of octets as its state. The state has Nb 4-octet columns. 
Initially, the state is filled column by column from the 4Nb-octet input block. The state is 
transformed in Nr rounds into a final state, which is then read out column by column as the 
output block. Before round 1, between rounds, and after round Nr is an ⊕, into the state, of the 
next 4Nb octets from the expanded key, read out as columns. Rounds 1 through Nr−1 comprise 
an identical sequence of operations, while round Nr omits one of them. The Rijndael key is a 
4Nk-octet block. The key expansion algorithm flows the key, column by column, into Nk 4-octet 
columns, then proceeds to create additional columns until it has (Nr+1)Nb columns, the exact 
amount of expanded key required. Key expansion uses the same kinds of primitive operations 
as the rounds do. Rows, columns, and round keys are numbered starting at 0. Round numbers 
start at 1. 3.5.2 Primitive Operations Rijndael is based on four primitive operations. • ⊕ • An 


## Page 17

octet-for-octet substitution, called the S-box (see Figure 3-24) • A rearrangement of octets 
comprising rotating a row or column by some number of cells • An operation called MixColumn, 
which replaces a 4-octet column with another 4-octet column. MixColumn can be 
implemented with a single table (Figure 3-26) containing 256 4- octet columns. Each of the four 
octets in an input column is used as an index to retrieve a column from the table; each column 
retrieved from the table is rotated vertically so that its top octet is in the same row as the input 
octet; and the four rotated columns are ⊕’d together to produce the output column. (See 
Figure 3-25.) We’ll describe MixColumn mathematically in §24.5 Mathematics of Rijndael. 3.5.2 
ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES) 79 right (low-order) nibble 0123456789abcdef left 
(high-order) nibble 0 63 7c 77 7b f2 6b 6f c5 30 01 67 2b fe d7 ab 76 1 ca 82 c9 7d fa 59 47 f0 ad 
d4 a2 af 9c a4 72 c0 2 b7 fd 93 26 36 3f f7 cc 34 a5 e5 f1 71 d8 31 15 3 04 c7 23 c3 18 96 05 9a 07 
12 80 e2 eb 27 b2 75 4 09 83 2c 1a 1b 6e 5a a0 52 3b d6 b3 29 e3 2f 84 5 53 d1 00 ed 20 fc b1 5b 
6a cb be 39 4a 4c 58 cf 6 d0 ef aa fb 43 4d 33 85 45 f9 02 7f 50 3c 9f a8 7 51 a3 40 8f 92 9d 38 f5 
bc b6 da 21 10 ff f3 d2 8 cd 0c 13 ec 5f 97 44 17 c4 a7 7e 3d 64 5d 19 73 9 60 81 4f dc 22 2a 90 88 
46 ee b8 14 de 5e 0b db a e0 32 3a 0a 49 06 24 5c c2 d3 ac 62 91 95 e4 79 b e7 c8 37 6d 8d d5 4e 
a9 6c 56 f4 ea 65 7a ae 08 c ba 78 25 2e 1c a6 b4 c6 e8 dd 74 1f 4b bd 8b 8a d 70 3e b5 66 48 03 
f6 0e 61 35 57 b9 86 c1 1d 9e e e1 f8 98 11 69 d9 8e 94 9b 1e 87 e9 ce 55 28 df f 8c a1 89 0d bf e6 
42 68 41 99 2d 0f b0 54 bb 16 Figure 3-24. Rijndael S-box 2b 56 ⊕ 42 d4 b3 ⊕ 2b ⊕ 4c de a7 ⊕ 
d4 ⊕ 2b ⊕ b4 ad 41 ⊕ de ⊕ d4 ⊕ 7d 36 lookups ad ⊕ de ⊕ 67 ad ⊕ 79 ec Figure 3-25. 
MixColumn using table-lookup (see Figure 3-26) 80 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.5.2 right 
(low-order) nibble 0123456789abcdef left (high-order) nibble 0 00 00 00 00 02 01 01 03 04 02 02 
06 06 03 03 05 08 04 04 0c 0a 05 05 0f 0c 06 06 0a 0e 07 07 09 10 08 08 18 12 09 09 1b 14 0a 0a 
1e 16 0b 0b 1d 18 0c 0c 14 1a 0d 0d 17 1c 0e 0e 12 1e 0f 0f 11 1 20 10 10 30 22 11 11 33 24 12 12 
36 26 13 13 35 28 14 14 3c 2a 15 15 3f 2c 16 16 3a 2e 17 17 39 30 18 18 28 32 19 19 2b 34 1a 1a 
2e 36 1b 1b 2d 38 1c 1c 24 3a 1d 1d 27 3c 1e 1e 22 3e 1f 1f 21 2 40 20 20 60 42 21 21 63 44 22 22 
66 46 23 23 65 48 24 24 6c 4a 25 25 6f 4c 26 26 6a 4e 27 27 69 50 28 28 78 52 29 29 7b 54 2a 2a 
7e 56 2b 2b 7d 58 2c 2c 74 5a 2d 2d 77 5c 2e 2e 72 5e 2f 2f 71 3 60 30 30 50 62 31 31 53 64 32 32 
56 66 33 33 55 68 34 34 5c 6a 35 35 5f 6c 36 36 5a 6e 37 37 59 70 38 38 48 72 39 39 4b 74 3a 3a 
4e 76 3b 3b 4d 78 3c 3c 44 7a 3d 3d 47 7c 3e 3e 42 7e 3f 3f 41 4 80 40 40 c0 82 41 41 c3 84 42 42 
c6 86 43 43 c5 88 44 44 cc 8a 45 45 cf 8c 46 46 ca 8e 47 47 c9 90 48 48 d8 92 49 49 db 94 4a 4a 
de 96 4b 4b dd 98 4c 4c d4 9a 4d 4d d7 9c 4e 4e d2 9e 4f 4f d1 5 a0 50 50 f0 a2 51 51 f3 a4 52 52 
f6 a6 53 53 f5 a8 54 54 fc aa 55 55 ff ac 56 56 fa ae 57 57 f9 b0 58 58 e8 b2 59 59 eb b4 5a 5a ee 
b6 5b 5b ed b8 5c 5c e4 ba 5d 5d e7 bc 5e 5e e2 be 5f 5f e1 6 c0 60 60 a0 c2 61 61 a3 c4 62 62 a6 
c6 63 63 a5 c8 64 64 ac ca 65 65 af cc 66 66 aa ce 67 67 a9 d0 68 68 b8 d2 69 69 bb d4 6a 6a be 
d6 6b 6b bd d8 6c 6c b4 da 6d 6d b7 dc 6e 6e b2 de 6f 6f b1 7 e0 70 70 90 e2 71 71 93 e4 72 72 
96 e6 73 73 95 e8 74 74 9c ea 75 75 9f ec 76 76 9a ee 77 77 99 f0 78 78 88 f2 79 79 8b f4 7a 7a 8e 
f6 7b 7b 8d f8 7c 7c 84 fa 7d 7d 87 fc 7e 7e 82 fe 7f 7f 81 8 1b 80 80 9b 19 81 81 98 1f 82 82 9d 1d 
83 83 9e 13 84 84 97 11 85 85 94 17 86 86 91 15 87 87 92 0b 88 88 83 09 89 89 80 0f 8a 8a 85 0d 
8b 8b 86 03 8c 8c 8f 01 8d 8d 8c 07 8e 8e 89 05 8f 8f 8a 9 3b 90 90 ab 39 91 91 a8 3f 92 92 ad 3d 
93 93 ae 33 94 94 a7 31 95 95 a4 37 96 96 a1 35 97 97 a2 2b 98 98 b3 29 99 99 b0 2f 9a 9a b5 2d 
9b 9b b6 23 9c 9c bf 21 9d 9d bc 27 9e 9e b9 25 9f 9f ba a 5b a0 a0 fb 59 a1 a1 f8 5f a2 a2 fd 5d 
a3 a3 fe 53 a4 a4 f7 51 a5 a5 f4 57 a6 a6 f1 55 a7 a7 f2 4b a8 a8 e3 49 a9 a9 e0 4f aa aa e5 4d ab 
ab e6 43 ac ac ef 41 ad ad ec 47 ae ae e9 45 af af ea b 7b b0 b0 cb 79 b1 b1 c8 7f b2 b2 cd 7d b3 
b3 ce 73 b4 b4 c7 71 b5 b5 c4 77 b6 b6 c1 75 b7 b7 c2 6b b8 b8 d3 69 b9 b9 d0 6f ba ba d5 6d bb 
bb d6 63 bc bc df 61 bd bd dc 67 be be d9 65 bf bf da c 9b c0 c0 5b 99 c1 c1 58 9f c2 c2 5d 9d c3 
c3 5e 93 c4 c4 57 91 c5 c5 54 97 c6 c6 51 95 c7 c7 52 8b c8 c8 43 89 c9 c9 40 8f ca ca 45 8d cb 
cb 46 83 cc cc 4f 81 cd cd 4c 87 ce ce 49 85 cf cf 4a d bb d0 d0 6b b9 d1 d1 68 bf d2 d2 6d bd d3 
d3 6e b3 d4 d4 67 b1 d5 d5 64 b7 d6 d6 61 b5 d7 d7 62 ab d8 d8 73 a9 d9 d9 70 af da da 75 ad db 


## Page 18

db 76 a3 dc dc 7f a1 dd dd 7c a7 de de 79 a5 df df 7a e db e0 e0 3b d9 e1 e1 38 df e2 e2 3d dd e3 
e3 3e d3 e4 e4 37 d1 e5 e5 34 d7 e6 e6 31 d5 e7 e7 32 cb e8 e8 23 c9 e9 e9 20 cf ea ea 25 cd eb 
eb 26 c3 ec ec 2f c1 ed ed 2c c7 ee ee 29 c5 ef ef 2a f fb f0 f0 0b f9 f1 f1 08 ff f2 f2 0d fd f3 f3 0e f3 
f4 f4 07 f1 f5 f5 04 f7 f6 f6 01 f5 f7 f7 02 eb f8 f8 13 e9 f9 f9 10 ef fa fa 15 ed fb fb 16 e3 fc fc 1f e1 
fd fd 1c e7 fe fe 19 e5 ff ff 1a Figure 3-26. MixColumn table 3.5.2.1 ADVANCED ENCRYPTION 
STANDARD (AES) 81 3.5.2.1 What about the inverse cipher? • ⊕ is its own inverse • The inverse 
S-box is just given by a different table (see Figure 3-27) • The inverse of rotating a row or column 
is just rotating it the same amount in the opposite direction • The inverse of MixColumn, called 
InvMixColumn, is just like MixColumn, but with a different table (Figure 3-28) So the inverse 
cipher can clearly be implemented by applying the inverses of the primitive operations 
comprising the cipher in the opposite sequence from that in the cipher. But as it turns out, due 
to various mathematical properties (and by clever design), the inverse cipher can be made to 
look just like the forward cipher but with inverse operations, and with the round keys not just in 
reverse order, but having InvMixColumn applied to all but the first and last of them. This will be 
explained in §24.5 Mathematics of Rijndael. right (low-order) nibble 0123456789abcdef left 
(high-order) nibble 0 52 09 6a d5 30 36 a5 38 bf 40 a3 9e 81 f3 d7 fb 1 7c e3 39 82 9b 2f ff 87 34 
8e 43 44 c4 de e9 cb 2 54 7b 94 32 a6 c2 23 3d ee 4c 95 0b 42 fa c3 4e 3 08 2e a1 66 28 d9 24 b2 
76 5b a2 49 6d 8b d1 25 4 72 f8 f6 64 86 68 98 16 d4 a4 5c cc 5d 65 b6 92 5 6c 70 48 50 fd ed b9 
da 5e 15 46 57 a7 8d 9d 84 6 90 d8 ab 00 8c bc d3 0a f7 e4 58 05 b8 b3 45 06 7 d0 2c 1e 8f ca 3f 
0f 02 c1 af bd 03 01 13 8a 6b 8 3a 91 11 41 4f 67 dc ea 97 f2 cf ce f0 b4 e6 73 9 96 ac 74 22 e7 ad 
35 85 e2 f9 37 e8 1c 75 df 6e a 47 f1 1a 71 1d 29 c5 89 6f b7 62 0e aa 18 be 1b b fc 56 3e 4b c6 d2 
79 20 9a db c0 fe 78 cd 5a f4 c 1f dd a8 33 88 07 c7 31 b1 12 10 59 27 80 ec 5f d 60 51 7f a9 19 b5 
4a 0d 2d e5 7a 9f 93 c9 9c ef e a0 e0 3b 4d ae 2a f5 b0 c8 eb bb 3c 83 53 99 61 f 17 2b 04 7e ba 
77 d6 26 e1 69 14 63 55 21 0c 7d Figure 3-27. Rijndael inverse S-box 82 SECRET KEY 
CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.5.2.1 right (low-order) nibble 0123456789abcdef left (high-order) nibble 0 00 
00 00 00 0e 09 0d 0b 1c 12 1a 16 12 1b 17 1d 38 24 34 2c 36 2d 39 27 24 36 2e 3a 2a 3f 23 31 70 
48 68 58 7e 41 65 53 6c 5a 72 4e 62 53 7f 45 48 6c 5c 74 46 65 51 7f 54 7e 46 62 5a 77 4b 69 1 e0 
90 d0 b0 ee 99 dd bb fc 82 ca a6 f2 8b c7 ad d8 b4 e4 9c d6 bd e9 97 c4 a6 fe 8a ca af f3 81 90 d8 
b8 e8 9e d1 b5 e3 8c ca a2 fe 82 c3 af f5 a8 fc 8c c4 a6 f5 81 cf b4 ee 96 d2 ba e7 9b d9 2 db 3b 
bb 7b d5 32 b6 70 c7 29 a1 6d c9 20 ac 66 e3 1f 8f 57 ed 16 82 5c ff 0d 95 41 f1 04 98 4a ab 73 d3 
23 a5 7a de 28 b7 61 c9 35 b9 68 c4 3e 93 57 e7 0f 9d 5e ea 04 8f 45 fd 19 81 4c f0 12 3 3b ab 6b 
cb 35 a2 66 c0 27 b9 71 dd 29 b0 7c d6 03 8f 5f e7 0d 86 52 ec 1f 9d 45 f1 11 94 48 fa 4b e3 03 93 
45 ea 0e 98 57 f1 19 85 59 f8 14 8e 73 c7 37 bf 7d ce 3a b4 6f d5 2d a9 61 dc 20 a2 4 ad 76 6d f6 
a3 7f 60 fd b1 64 77 e0 bf 6d 7a eb 95 52 59 da 9b 5b 54 d1 89 40 43 cc 87 49 4e c7 dd 3e 05 ae 
d3 37 08 a5 c1 2c 1f b8 cf 25 12 b3 e5 1a 31 82 eb 13 3c 89 f9 08 2b 94 f7 01 26 9f 5 4d e6 bd 46 
43 ef b0 4d 51 f4 a7 50 5f fd aa 5b 75 c2 89 6a 7b cb 84 61 69 d0 93 7c 67 d9 9e 77 3d ae d5 1e 33 
a7 d8 15 21 bc cf 08 2f b5 c2 03 05 8a e1 32 0b 83 ec 39 19 98 fb 24 17 91 f6 2f 6 76 4d d6 8d 78 
44 db 86 6a 5f cc 9b 64 56 c1 90 4e 69 e2 a1 40 60 ef aa 52 7b f8 b7 5c 72 f5 bc 06 05 be d5 08 0c 
b3 de 1a 17 a4 c3 14 1e a9 c8 3e 21 8a f9 30 28 87 f2 22 33 90 ef 2c 3a 9d e4 7 96 dd 06 3d 98 d4 
0b 36 8a cf 1c 2b 84 c6 11 20 ae f9 32 11 a0 f0 3f 1a b2 eb 28 07 bc e2 25 0c e6 95 6e 65 e8 9c 63 
6e fa 87 74 73 f4 8e 79 78 de b1 5a 49 d0 b8 57 42 c2 a3 40 5f cc aa 4d 54 8 41 ec da f7 4f e5 d7 
fc 5d fe c0 e1 53 f7 cd ea 79 c8 ee db 77 c1 e3 d0 65 da f4 cd 6b d3 f9 c6 31 a4 b2 af 3f ad bf a4 
2d b6 a8 b9 23 bf a5 b2 09 80 86 83 07 89 8b 88 15 92 9c 95 1b 9b 91 9e 9 a1 7c 0a 47 af 75 07 4c 
bd 6e 10 51 b3 67 1d 5a 99 58 3e 6b 97 51 33 60 85 4a 24 7d 8b 43 29 76 d1 34 62 1f df 3d 6f 14 
cd 26 78 09 c3 2f 75 02 e9 10 56 33 e7 19 5b 38 f5 02 4c 25 fb 0b 41 2e a 9a d7 61 8c 94 de 6c 87 
86 c5 7b 9a 88 cc 76 91 a2 f3 55 a0 ac fa 58 ab be e1 4f b6 b0 e8 42 bd ea 9f 09 d4 e4 96 04 df f6 
8d 13 c2 f8 84 1e c9 d2 bb 3d f8 dc b2 30 f3 ce a9 27 ee c0 a0 2a e5 b 7a 47 b1 3c 74 4e bc 37 66 
55 ab 2a 68 5c a6 21 42 63 85 10 4c 6a 88 1b 5e 71 9f 06 50 78 92 0d 0a 0f d9 64 04 06 d4 6f 16 


## Page 19

1d c3 72 18 14 ce 79 32 2b ed 48 3c 22 e0 43 2e 39 f7 5e 20 30 fa 55 c ec 9a b7 01 e2 93 ba 0a f0 
88 ad 17 fe 81 a0 1c d4 be 83 2d da b7 8e 26 c8 ac 99 3b c6 a5 94 30 9c d2 df 59 92 db d2 52 80 
c0 c5 4f 8e c9 c8 44 a4 f6 eb 75 aa ff e6 7e b8 e4 f1 63 b6 ed fc 68 d 0c 0a 67 b1 02 03 6a ba 10 
18 7d a7 1e 11 70 ac 34 2e 53 9d 3a 27 5e 96 28 3c 49 8b 26 35 44 80 7c 42 0f e9 72 4b 02 e2 60 
50 15 ff 6e 59 18 f4 44 66 3b c5 4a 6f 36 ce 58 74 21 d3 56 7d 2c d8 e 37 a1 0c 7a 39 a8 01 71 2b 
b3 16 6c 25 ba 1b 67 0f 85 38 56 01 8c 35 5d 13 97 22 40 1d 9e 2f 4b 47 e9 64 22 49 e0 69 29 5b 
fb 7e 34 55 f2 73 3f 7f cd 50 0e 71 c4 5d 05 63 df 4a 18 6d d6 47 13 f d7 31 dc ca d9 38 d1 c1 cb 
23 c6 dc c5 2a cb d7 ef 15 e8 e6 e1 1c e5 ed f3 07 f2 f0 fd 0e ff fb a7 79 b4 92 a9 70 b9 99 bb 6b 
ae 84 b5 62 a3 8f 9f 5d 80 be 91 54 8d b5 83 4f 9a a8 8d 46 97 a3 Figure 3-28. InvMixColumn 
table 3.5.3 ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES) 83 3.5.3 Key Expansion Key expansion 
starts with the key arranged as Nk 4-octet columns (see Figure 3-29) and iteratively generates 
the next Nk columns of the expanded key (see Figure 3-30). To generate the ith set of Nk a Key 
k0 k1 k2 k3 k4 k5 k6 k7 ... k0 k4 set 0 k1 k5 ... k2 k6 k3 k7 Figure 3-29. Rijndael key expansion, 
creation of set 0 a Ci S ⊕ set i−1 ... S S S ⊕ set i ⊕ ... ⊕ Figure 3-30. Rijndael key expansion, 
iteration step, Nk ≤ 6 84 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.5.4 columns (i starts at 1; the 0th set is 
the supplied key), all that is needed is the (i−1)th set. Column 0 of the new set is gotten by 
rotating the last column of the (i−1)th set upward one cell, applying the S-box to each octet, and 
then ⊕ing a constant based on i (see Figure 3-31) into octet 0. The rest of the columns in the set 
are generated in turn by ⊕ing the previous column with the corresponding column from the 
previous [(i−1)th] set. There is one exception to this—if Nk > 6, then an additional step is 
required to finish generating column 4, namely the application of the S-box to each octet (see 
Figure 3-32). Key expansion terminates as soon as (Nr+1)Nb columns of expanded key have 
been generated; this may happen in the middle of a set. 3.5.4 Rounds Each round is an identical 
sequence of three operations: 1. Each octet of the state has the S-Box applied to it. 2. Row 1 of 
the state is rotated left 1 column. Row 2 of the state is rotated left 2+ Nb/8  columns (2 if Nb < 
8, 3 otherwise). Row 3 of the state is rotated left 3+ Nb/7  columns (3 if Nb < 7, 4 otherwise). 
(Note that for AES, this simplifies to rotating row i left i columns.) 3. Each column of the state 
has MixColumn applied to it. Round Nr omits this operation. i = 1 thru 10: 1 2 4 8 10 20 40 80 1b 
36 i = 11 thru 20: 6c d8 ab 4d 9a 2f 5e bc 63 c6 i = 21 thru 30: 97 35 6a d4 b3 7d fa ef c5 (91) 
Figure 3-31. Rijndael key-expansion constants Ci a S ⊕⊕⊕⊕ S ⊕⊕⊕ S S Figure 3-32. 
Difference in Rijndael key expansion step, Nk = 8 [and similarly for Nk = 7] 3.5.5 ADVANCED 
ENCRYPTION STANDARD (AES) 85 3.5.5 Inverse Rounds Since each operation is invertible, 
decryption can be done by performing the inverse of each operation in the opposite order from 
that for encryption, and using the round keys in the reverse order. But as we mentioned earlier, 
we can make decryption have the same structure as encryption. To do this, we not only have to 
use the round keys in the opposite order, but we have to apply InvMixColumn to each column of 
all but the initial and final round keys. Then each inverse round is an identical sequence of three 
operations: 1. Each octet of the state has the inverse S-Box applied to it. 2. Row 1 of the state is 
rotated right 1 column. Row 2 of the state is rotated right 2+ Nb/8  columns (2 if Nb < 8, 3 
otherwise). Row 3 of the state is rotated right 3+ Nb/7  columns (3 if Nb < 7, 4 otherwise). (Note 
that for AES, this simplifies to rotating row i right i columns.) 3. Each column of the state has 
InvMixColumn applied to it. Round Nr omits this operation. 3.5.6 Optimization In the 
straightforward implementation of a round, each octet of the state undergoes a table-lookup to 
apply the S-Box, and the resulting octet is later used for another table-lookup as part of 
MixColumn. We can combine these into a single table-lookup that transforms an octet into the 
column found by applying the S-Box and looking up the result in the MixColumn table. We can 
further optimize a round by retaining the old state while we compute the new state. We initialize 
the new state to the round key. For each octet in the old state, we perform the combined table-


## Page 20

lookup and ⊕ the resulting column (rotated downward by the old octet’s row number) into the 
appropriate column of the new state. For the first row (row 0), this is the old octet’s column. For 
the second row (row 1), it’s the column one to the left.* For the third row (row 2), it’s either two 
or three columns to the left (depending on whether or not Nb < 8); and for the last row (row 3), 
it’s either three or four columns to the left (depending on whether or not Nb < 7). When we’ve 
processed all the old octets, we’ve completed the round (including the following ⊕). The last 
round is a little different. We initialize the new state to the round key. For each octet in the old 
state, we apply the S-Box by table-lookup and ⊕ the result into the appropriate octet of the new 
state. The destination octet is in the same row as the source octet, and its column depends on 
the source row and column in the same manner as for the other rounds. The inverse rounds can 
be optimized in the same manner (with left replaced by right). *Think of the columns as residing 
on an upright cylinder—the rightmost column is immediately to the left of the leftmost. 86 
SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.6 3.6 RC4 A long random (or pseudo-random) string used to 
encrypt a message with a simple ⊕ operation is known as a one-time pad. A stream cipher 
generates a one-time pad and applies it to a stream of plaintext with ⊕. RC4 is a stream cipher 
designed by Ron Rivest. RC4 was a trade secret, but was “outed” in 1994. As a result, it has 
been extensively analyzed and is considered secure as long as you discard the first few (say 
256) octets of the generated pad. The algorithm is an extremely simple (and fast) generator of 
pseudo-random streams of octets. The key can be from 1 to 256 octets. Even with a minimal 
key (a single null octet), the generated pseudo-random stream passes all the usual 
randomness tests (and so makes a fine pseudorandom number generator—I3’ve used it for that 
purpose on numerous occasions). RC4 keeps 258 octets of state information, 256 octets of 
which are a permutation of 0, 1,…255 that is initially computed from the key and then altered as 
each pad octet is generated. The box on page 87 gives a complete C implementation of RC4 
one-time pad generation. 3.7 HOMEWORK 1. Come up with as efficient an encoding as you can 
to specify a completely general one-to-one mapping between 64-bit input values and 64-bit 
output values. 2. Token cards display a number that changes periodically, perhaps every 
minute. Each such device has a unique secret key. A human can prove possession of a 
particular such device by entering the displayed number into a computer system. The computer 
system knows the secret keys of each authorized device. How would you design such a device? 
3. How many DES keys, on the average, encrypt a particular plaintext block to a particular 
ciphertext block? 4. Make an argument as to why the initial permutation of the bits of the DES 
key cannot have any security value. 5. Suppose the DES mangler function mapped every 32-bit 
value to zero, regardless of the value of its input. What function would DES then compute? 6. 
Are all the 56 bits of the DES key used an equal number of times in the Ki? Specify, for each of 
the Ki, which bits are not used. 3.7 HOMEWORK 87 7. What would change in the DES 
description if keys were input as 56-bit quantities rather than 64-bit quantities? 8. Why is a DES 
weak key (see §3.3.6 Weak and Semi-Weak Keys) its own inverse? Hint: DES encryption and 
decryption are the same once the per-round keys are generated. RC4 typedef unsigned char 
uns8; typedef unsigned short uns16; static uns8 state[256], x, y; /* 258 octets of state 
information */ void rc4init (key, length) /* initialize for encryption / decryption */ uns8 *key; 
uns16 length; { int i; uns8 t; uns8 j; uns8 k = 0; for (i = 256; i--; ) state[i] = i; for (i = 0, j = 0; i < 256; 
i++, j = (j + 1) % length) t = state[i], state[i] = state[k += key[j] + t], state[k] = t; x = 0; y = 0; } uns8 
rc4step () /* return next pseudo-random octet */ { uns8 t; t = state[y += state[++x]], state[y] = 
state[x], state[x] = t; return (state[state[x] + state[y]]); } 88 SECRET KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY 3.7 9. 
Why is each DES semi-weak key the inverse of another semi-weak key? 10. Class project: 
design and implement an efficient DES breaking system. (Hint: Have your system take as input 
a 〈plaintext, ciphertext〉 pair and a starting key number, and searches from that starting key 


